hi David good to see you uh
really good to see you and to have you
in the studio for an interview about
digitalization about Ai and data the
role in in human society and you're one
of the persons I I love to interview
about this topic back to your
contributions to science in terms of uh
Quantum Computing Quantum algorithms uh
will be interesting to start with the
question uh what what do you think that
quantum computer will will mean for AI
the way that I I understand it at
present I don't think that Quantum
computation
will contribute
to
um
artificial intelligence in the sense of
um or autonomously acting information
processing which performs useful
functions either in the sense of
mindless machines which I would call
artificial intelligence AI
or in the future artificial general
intelligence AGI which is like doing the
thing that humans do thinking
explanatory knowledge creation that sort
of thing I don't think that
um
quantum computers will play a central
role in either of those things there
will be specialized roles
there are particular functions that
Quantum algorithms can perform
stupendously
emotionally than any classical
algorithm but
um I think those at present it looks as
though those will be confined to special
purposes
so you know for example uh drug design
right or
game playing
now you know those might be quite
important but but they are not the
generality of either AI or AGI
the difference is and I often say that
AI what's currently called AI and AGI
are not only different from each other
they are very close to being the exact
opposites of each other
um the reason is that in an AI current
AIS like like an AI that
diagnoses diseases or an AI that plays
chess
um or an AI that that controls a huge
Factory
um those things have objective functions
that is they have a function that they
are designed to maximize
and that is why they are used in those
particular applications
or in military terms you could you could
say the the objective is is to hit the
target
you might say the objective is to hit
the target unless
some some things specified but it's a
specified thing
comes up in which case don't hit the
target and and so on
this is
as I said almost the opposite of what
humans do when humans think
uh for a start the um
the AI has to be obedient that is it has
to actually do the things it is
programmed to do
whereas a human is fundamentally
disobedient especially when being
creative
when a human plays chess
they are performing a completely
different kind of computation they don't
do the same things they don't
investigate the same possibilities that
the artificial chess playing machine
does because the artificial one is
capable of looking at billions and
billions of possibilities whereas the
human
can only look at what you know hundreds
or something so they're doing something
completely different another difference
is that the human can explain
can write a book later you know having
become world champion can write a book
saying how I did it
as the computer program that beats the
world champion can write no such book
because it has no idea how it did it it
was just following a program I I was
doing this and that and that and none of
that is Illuminating and also third
thing
the chess player can decide I don't want
to play chess anymore from now on I will
play go or from now on I will play
tennis
and
if commanded to play chess the
functionality will will deteriorate
completely
uh so
um so those things are different what we
want in an AGI is that it behaves in a
way that cannot be specified in advance
because if you specified it you would
already have the answer the AGI program
has to give unexpected answers answers
to questions we didn't even know how to
ask that's that's fascinating you
mentioned a few differences between
humans and machines or or AI yes do you
think the the way humans think you also
mentioned thinking which is not deep
learning and pattern matching that we
know at the moment but that yeah it has
to deal with reasoning that there has
been done research that that shows that
that uh at a cognitive level uh humans
process information with a bit rate of
50 bits per second which is not much is
that the limitation of human thinking uh
is that a reason why we think totally
different when we play a game of this or
or go or or do any problem solving or or
is it that the way we do it is much more
efficient and and effective first of all
I don't think it's as slow as 50 per
second because the brain is somewhat
parallel
we don't know how parallel it is but the
total number of operations per second is
probably many more than 50 but it's many
less than right um than a billion so
we're not in the same league as
computers when it comes to
a number of Opera number of Elementary
operations per second
so we work not by
pursuing every possibility and taking
them off one by one we work by
understanding
so a chess player works by first he
looks at the looks at a chessboard and
sees tries to understand the situation
understand what is at stake here and
then conjectures so I'm a follower of
the philosopher Karl Popper yeah who
yeah me too yeah taught us science and
thinking in general is is done by
process of conjecture and criticism
no program
at the moment can do that can do
anything like that and as I said
in a in a very important sense
this is the opposite of what an AI does
because the way to make a better AI is
to find
um
uh better ways of pruning the algorithm
so that so that the the
um
uh program is unable to investigate or
is forbidden from investigating certain
things which the programmer has decided
in advance
are going to be a waste of time it's
that the human can create something new
something that the programmer didn't and
couldn't envisage one way one day we
will know how that is done as well
but it is not done in the same way that
it's not done by pruning by by
preventing the program from thinking
certain thoughts it's the opposite it's
by allowing the program to think any
thoughts how would you define the notion
of understanding
well uh understanding to me is is very
closely related to explanation
so uh explanation is uh an explanation
of something is a statement of how
invisible things affect the visible
things how the things that we don't know
about
affect uh the things that we do know
about so for in in chess for example
the invisible things are abstract things
that they are things like
um that night is dangerous there it's
it's better to restrict its movement now
there's no there's no such thing as
dangerous or restrict its movement in
the in the rules of chess
uh chess playing computers don't know
about such Concepts they don't use them
um so there was a so what what this
means from the point of view of of what
an explanation is
the uh human chess player
has conjectured that there is an
underlying structure beneath the rules
of Chess and this particular chess game
and has decided to think in terms of
this underlying structure so the
explanation which may be in words like I
just said it may be you know that night
is dangerous and therefore but it may
not be in words it may be an inexplicit
understanding which is also an
explanation though that you know some
explanations are not expressed in words
they they are expressed in in
mental constructs that that haven't been
verbalized
and a combination of those two is is
used by humans for all sorts of things
um that's interesting
because you you talk about understanding
in terms of explanations or it's very
close to the destinations explainable AI
is it's a big discussion at the moment
because many people think that if we
design AI for serious applications high
risk applications AI should be able to
explain itself and for that purpose we
are trying to combine a deep learning
the learning aspect of cognition with
reasoning causal relationships so and
within AI at the moment you don't see
this because the nodes have very
abstract representation there are no
causal relationships but if you combine
reasoning with deep learning and you can
Define causal relationships
within the AI process do you think that
we will be able to get explainable AI at
level where humans can understand the
explanation yes but I don't think that
this is a step towards AGI no on the
contrary it's another step away from AGI
um the the
computer program may be able to say I
diagnosed that this was cancer because
there was this result from the X-ray and
this result
and we'll be able in a way that the
human can understand
but uh present-day AI will never be able
to say
I guess that there is a new disease here
which operates in the following way like
a human doctor might ai's in a very deep
sense cannot create anything new they
can create new implications of existing
knowledge which has been put into them
they they can just like a uh a a program
that calculates digits of pi
can can say you know I have a world
record I've I've computed the 10 billion
uh decimal place of Pi that is
calculating implications of existing
knowledge but it cannot say I don't want
to do this anymore because there's a
better way of calculating digits of pi
that that's a good one
um I think that's a very important
notion um so so if you talk about
generating new knowledge we have
examples where AI discovered new
antibiotics I think it's done by
matching chemical properties by the
properties of cells for example or
bacteria
that's not really explanatory knowledge
that's not really new knowledge it's
just just doing the hard work
but how do you feel about AI discovering
new laws of physics based on all kind of
patterns that you feed into AI of moving
objects uh very complex patterns and it
comes up with new laws of physics not
new to humans but new to the algorithm
do you could do you think we can
classify that as explanatory knowledge
no I think all such cases are going to
be cases where the knowledge has been
pre-programmed into the program or its
data by someone who already knew that
explanatory knowledge they may not have
done it consciously but it's very easy
when you are when you're writing a
program to include knowledge that you
know like for example knowledge of how
to partition the possible data
into into what is relevant and what is
irrelevant or even within the relevant
things what what the types are the the
the for example as you mentioned all the
positions for example is a category that
you would feed into the program and so
you're already telling the program to to
find an answer in the form all the
positions obey such and such right but
that's not what physicists do when they
discover a new law they they discover
the concepts behind all the something
so you don't know what to ask until you
have an explanatory Theory
so you already feed AI by the type of
question you ask yes and this this
brings me and then it's it
sorry it's it's as you said it then does
the hard work but the hard work is is
not the discovery of a new law no
and and I think this is really crucial
uh part in the development of AI because
um many people say uh AI uh should do
what humans do and that's showing moral
Behavior Uh we don't only follow the
rules that's what you said a few minutes
ago we also crossed the lines and we
make trade-offs uh trade-offs uh in how
we relate to each other how we make
decisions in critical situations uh and
later on the judge May judge whether
this was a good trade-off but we we do
it we cross the lines which you could
call a moral decision making or ethical
decision making yes now a very important
question is relating to what you just
said
um do you think that Ai and not
necessarily General AI but but whatever
form of AI will be able to learn moral
Behavior
from its interaction with human beings
and
well only in the in the uh doing the
hard work sense the the real content of
the moral behavior that it uh executes
will have been put in right by the
programmer and it's a bit like
um
training a dog
so a dog can't create uh explanatory
knowledge either
a dog can be trained to follow certain
moral patterns and it's actually amazing
what dogs can be trained to do they they
I saw a video recently where a dog was
trained to
intercept a a knife being being uh
somebody attacking somebody with a knife
and the person then did many things that
sort of to a human look a bit like
attacking somebody with a knife and the
dog just sat there and and you know just
smiled and did nothing and then then
when they really did attack the the
person with a knife the dog intercepted
it much faster than a human can react
machines can no doubt do that sort of
thing even better than dogs
but
that's not moral behavior that that is
just obeying rules
um when it comes to moral Behavior we
will need to have an AGI and then we
will have to lose the feature of
obedience
so a an AGI that is constrained to be
obedient
is a Slave
and having having slaves and basing an
economy on slaves is a way to total
disaster and if you talk about
self-driving cars for example
or autonomous responses to cyber attacks
which is also intelligent software do
you want these systems self-driving cars
response systems to be slaves or do you
want them to be disobedient and do
whatever they like in those roles
uh so I I keep having to stress that we
have no idea how to how to make them how
to make agis at the moment no uh so Adam
it's not that whether I want it to be a
a a Mindless entity it is a Mindless
entity and cannot
um uh make moral judgments in fact it
can only execute other people's moral
judgments I don't so so in in the in the
case of self-driving cars
I think it's an incredibly difficult
problem and I have no idea when this
will be solved uh I think perhaps people
are being too optimistic at the moment
but in principle I don't think it's a
it's a it's a great problem it is very
similar to guide dogs for the blind
so the guide dogs for the blind also
have to assess traffic and and and
assess other people and assess certain
types of threat and ignore others and so
on and again it's amazing what guide
dogs can do
and uh
I think
autonomous cars are probably a harder
problem than that but it's it's really
the same kind of problem and doesn't
require anything fundamentally different
from training a guide dog
yes you know sometimes
sometimes even uh
a non-autonomous car can kill people
because of a design flaw
um you know some somebody will press the
brake under circumstances where the
anti-skid system should not have been
engaged and it was engaged and therefore
kills someone that now we say that
that's obviously a matter of design or
maybe it's not even a design flaw it's a
design trade-off it's saying that that
999 times out of a thousand
that way of judging the situation will
be the right one and the thousandth one
is uh kills somebody just in the way
that
um sometimes people are killed by their
own pressure cooker I I think uh humans
in very critical situations for example
car driving and accidents they just
Panic they don't show any moral Behavior
at all but still you know the moral
machine experiments of MIT they they try
to let people decide between two
different situations to see whether
gender for example an age of humans
determine the value of life and what
what should the car do
I don't think this is a very
representative experiment to to progress
on self uh driving cars but the question
is do you think there is any potential
in trying to make a human moral decision
making the the basic attributes and
their values to make them explicit
quantitative understandable for machines
so we we can make uh self-driving cars
showing a moral decision making do you
think that's a
um in principle yes in principle it's
always worth trying to make our
inexplicit ideas explicit so that they
can be more efficiently criticized and
understood but I I think it's very
dangerous to think that one can do this
in any kind of complete way
the the the the
um conscious and explicit part of our
thinking is is is
um a small
a layer on top of the important part
which is the inexplicit part and that
will always be so we can we can make
some of the explicit inexplicity part
explicit but there will always be more
underneath that that we can't
um that we can't yet Express in words
and if we take the part that we Express
in and take it too seriously
um like like Regulators in some
Industries sometimes do for example then
we end up with a ridiculous
implementation that obeys what we think
we know
but actually completely go in practice
will completely go against common sense
uh also I think these experiments you
speak of I don't
um think that much can be deduced from
those because
the participants in in an experiment are
in an artificial situation they have
gone to this experiment because they've
been invited and then they they go in
the door where it says something above
and so and so laboratory and then they
go up the stairs and in into the room
and some and this is a completely
different experience to getting into
your car to go to work today and then
unexpectedly finding a sheep in the road
right it's it's it cannot be compared
so I think the outcomes of such
experiments are are not helpful and
these things can't really be
experimented on at all you can train a
guide dog to do that job
reasonably well in fact so well that
everybody is impressed with how well it
can do it
yeah I think the same will be true that
the ultimate limit of self-driving cars
will be that limit too it that they will
they will do it very well sometimes they
will make a mistake
uh but on in general they will do it so
well that people will say oh my God that
they knew uh I'm impressed with how it
dealt with that situation
and uh this will be done
mostly
by
um feeding in rules just like with the
dog
the rules contain both explicit and
inexplicit knowledge
there are the rules
automatically contain knowledge that we
don't know how to express but writing
down the rule is a way of expressing it
and then the the once you've done this
with a few dogs you know the pitfalls
you know that you know sometimes unless
it's been trained to do so the dog will
make a mistake of a certain kind and
then you know that you've got to to uh
do better but I'm sure that the guide
dog for the blind
looks after its blind customer better
than say a human would because a human
is much less devoted to the task sooner
or later the human will make a mistake I
think
the guide dog is is a great metaphor
what would you say is the greatest
challenge for humans
to use the potential of AI and not to be
the victim of AI the coming years so
with AI
it's uh it's important to realize that
that
AIS are
are fallible
and not entirely controllable by by the
rules simply because we do not know what
rules to give them
uh just like dogs are fallible
so when we let's say introduce a machine
to do surgery
or to diagnose disease
we must expect although although we will
have built in lots of inexplicit
knowledge as well as explicit knowledge
into the rules we must expect that the
first one
will not
be as good as the tenth one and
therefore
it's important to supervise the first
one in the same way that we supervise a
human surgeon
on the first time they were moving up
someone's appendix there has to be a
more experienced surgeon standing by and
and looking out for mistakes and if that
surgeon is experienced in training young
surgeons then that surgeon will get
experience of what kind of mistakes a
young surgeon makes and it should be the
same we mustn't ever rely on an AGI
being right when we don't know we might
we must be aware of saying well it's
doing so and so
and it's usually much better than a
human so so it must be right it it that
it must be supervised in that sense but
then once a technology is mature
and these mistakes of have become far
less than human mistakes then we can
begin to rely on it in the sense same
sense that we rely on
an elevator an automatic elevator not
dropping us to the ground you know
um
the very first time a steam engine was
demonstrated to the public it killed
somebody
I mean esteem locomotive yeah it killed
a member of parliament because people
were not used to the situation of the of
the locomotive
passing another object rapidly where
rapidly meant like 15 miles an hour
um and the this uh mp uh I forget what
it was here but but anyway he he lost
the leg and then late later the the the
same engine took him to the hospital
much faster than he could have got there
any other way but he still died
unfortunately otherwise it would have
been a much better story but one
question the burning question is this
large community of Applied researchers
that's working on
um making uh AI applications in a
responsible way for all these domains
Mobility energy uh human health care
whatever what advice do you have for
this community
to the extent that they think that
they're making AGI
they're not and they're going down a
blind alley and there's a danger of
fooling themselves not to mention
wasting their effort
in regard to making AIS
the sky's the limit I mean I every year
I'm Amazed by the by the power of AIS
and I I think the the dangers are not
apocalyptic the the dangers are similar
to the danger of any new technology like
the steam engine
um we have to be wary we have to we have
to make sure that in applications that
look as though they don't require
supervision in fact they do until
the technology has matured thank you so
much
David for your well it's been fun for
your explicit thinking but also for your
implicit wisdom that you brought into
this conversation thank you very much
well thank you
[Music]